Extensions for EM and APM for use cases from FAU Erlangen-Nuremberg CENEM and APM run-through NFDI-MatWerk (#421)
FAIRmat-NFDI/nexus_definitions: manual/source/fairmat-cover.rst

Aims and contextualization
##########################

Organizing (meta)data for materials characterization calls for a mastering of formatting varieties and data volume handling while assuring semantic interpretability, validity, and keeping inaccuracies documented and controlled. Data schemas and file formats are the tools that enable a structured and semantically annotated storage and processing of research data. Frequently, these tools organize entities effectively as graph-based representations.
In practice, experimentalists need to navigate a tool landscape that is heterogeneous with different levels of (meta)data and information granularity,
different formatting, and differing semantic concepts. This reduces interoperability when working with the same data across different software tools
be this for research data management and documentation or data processing.

`NeXus <https://www.nexusformat.org/>`_ is a project for standardizing the formatting of (meta)data schema. NeXus is rooted in the condensed matter physics. The development of NeXus is coordinated by the `NeXus International Advisory Committee (NIAC) <https://www.nexusformat.org/NIAC.html>`_.

> The FAIRmat-NeXus proposal is an interdisciplinary data-science- and semantic-technology-driven standardization project that extends NeXus beyond its original scope which has been the standardization of neutron, x-ray, and muon experiments. The extensions from the FAIRmat-NeXus proposal cover the materials-science-branch of electron microscopy (EM), photo-emission spectroscopy (PES), optical spectroscopy, and standards for the field of atom probe tomography and related field-ion microscopy (atom probe microscopy). The FAIRmat proposal to NeXus is an effort by the community of scientists of the `FAIRmat consortium <https://www.fairmat-nfdi.eu/fairmat/about-fairmat/consortium-fairmat>`_. As a project which aims at creating an infrastructure for experimental data to be findable, accessible, interoperable, and reusable (FAIR) in the fields of condensed-matter physics and the chemical physics of solids, FAIRmat has adopted NeXus as the common format.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The FAIRmat-NeXus proposal is an interdisciplinary data-science- and semantic-technology-driven standardization project that extends NeXus beyond its original scope which has been the standardization of neutron, x-ray, and muon experiments. The extensions from the FAIRmat-NeXus proposal cover the materials-science-branch of electron microscopy (EM), photoemission spectroscopy (PES), optical spectroscopy, and standards for the field of atom probe tomography and related field-ion microscopy (atom probe microscopy). The FAIRmat proposal to NeXus is an effort by the `FAIRmat consortium <https://www.fairmat-nfdi.eu/fairmat/about-fairmat/consortium-fairmat>`_. As a project which aims at creating an infrastructure for experimental data to be findable, accessible, interoperable, and reusable (FAIR) in the fields of condensed-matter physics and the chemical physics of solids, FAIRmat has adopted NeXus as the common format.
```

.. _Achievements:

Achievements
############

Within the five years funding of the FAIRmat project, we have achieved a substantiated broadening of the experimental techniques that NeXus covers. This manual details these achievements for each technique and connects to the contents of the official NeXus User Manual (`see <https://manual.nexusformat.org/user_manual.html>`_). Here, we compile both efforts into one documentation for making the exploring of NeXus more convenient for users. The content of the FAIRmat-NeXus proposal has been successfully accepted as a standard, after several community discussions at international meetings with the NIAC. Decisions were made public with the `v2025.11 <https://github.com/nexusformat/definitions/releases/tag/v2025.11>`_ and the `v2026.01 <https://github.com/nexusformat/definitions/releases/tag/v2026.01>`_ releases.

However, developing data schemas alone is insufficient for making research data management an effective reality. Instead, also examples are required that prove these schemas turn out useful in practice and production environments. Therefore, perhaps the greatest resource, of the coordinated

> work between the NeXus community and the FAIRmat consortium has been the inclusion of experimental datasets in the `NOMAD Laboratory <https://nomad-lab.eu>`_ while assuring that these store along the definitions of the FAIRmat-NeXus proposal.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, developing data schemas alone is insufficient for making research data management an effective reality. Instead, also examples are required that prove these schemas turn out useful in practice and production environments. Therefore, perhaps the greatest resource of the coordinated
work between the NeXus community and the FAIRmat consortium has been the inclusion of experimental datasets in the `NOMAD Laboratory <https://nomad-lab.eu>`_ while assuring that these store along the definitions of the FAIRmat-NeXus proposal.
```

.. _Outreach:

Outreach to the community
#########################

> If you are applying any of the here detailed characterization methods and you are interested in producing FAIR data and accessing the FAIRmat tools, we invite you to try out our proposed structure. If you find any conflicts or inconsistencies, please raise them to us using the comment section (implemented with `Hypothesis <https://web.hypothes.is/>`_) or reporting an issue on the `GitHub repository of the project <https://github.com/FAIRmat-NFDI/nexus_definitions/issues>`_. Feel also very much invited to contact us directly at the `FAIRmat-Team <https://www.fair-di.eu/fairmat/about-fairmat/team-fairmat>`_.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you apply any of the characterization methods described here and are interested in producing FAIR data and using the FAIRmat tools, we invite you to try our proposed data structure. If you find any conflicts or inconsistencies, please raise them to us using the comment section (implemented with `Hypothesis <https://web.hypothes.is/>`_) or reporting an issue on the `GitHub repository of the project <https://github.com/FAIRmat-NFDI/nexus_definitions/issues>`_. Feel also very much invited to contact us directly at the `FAIRmat-Team <https://www.fair-di.eu/fairmat/about-fairmat/team-fairmat>`_.
```

.. _VersionAlignment:

Conceptual alignment of the official NIAC repository and its FAIRmat-NeXus fork
###############################################################################

> NeXus definitions are version controlled. Different GitHub repositories exists where these versions are stored: One is the `official NeXus repository <www.github.com/nexusformat/definitions>`_ that is maintained by the NIAC. Another one, representing a fork of this NIAC repository, is the `FAIRmat nexus_definitions repository <www.github.com/FAIRmat-NFDI/nexus_definitions>`_. As FAIRmat we assure to keep the `fairmat branch of the nexus_definitions <https://github.com/FAIRmat-NFDI/nexus_definitions/tree/fairmat>`_ branch up-to-date with the `main branch of the official definitions <https://github.com/nexusformat/definitions/tree/main>`_ that is being maintained by the NIAC. Updates will be synced to bring back content from official releases issued by the NIAC. This assures that each version of the definitions from the FAIRmat-NeXus proposal remains as closely as possibly semantically aligned with a version published by the NIAC. At the same time this approach ensures that the development speed and update cycles of FAIRmat and the NIAC can different, and most importantly do not block each other. Maintaining and minimizing though semantic mismatch is key. We mention that it is possible that specific application definitions and base classes of the FAIRmat-NeXus proposal may contain additional concepts that have not yet been brought back or standardized by the NIAC. We avoid though a relaxing of requirement constraints for concepts within in the FAIRmat definitions when compared to the closest matching version of these concepts from the official definitions. Occasionally, additional optional concepts for specific FAIRmat definitions may extend the official definitions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
NeXus definitions are version controlled. Different GitHub repositories exists where these versions are stored: One is the `official NeXus repository <www.github.com/nexusformat/definitions>`_ that is maintained by the NIAC. Another one, representing a fork of this NIAC repository, is the `FAIRmat nexus_definitions repository <www.github.com/FAIRmat-NFDI/nexus_definitions>`_. As FAIRmat we assure to keep the `fairmat branch of the nexus_definitions <https://github.com/FAIRmat-NFDI/nexus_definitions/tree/fairmat>`_ branch up-to-date with the `main branch of the official definitions <https://github.com/nexusformat/definitions/tree/main>`_ that is being maintained by the NIAC. Updates will be synced to bring back content from official releases issued by the NIAC. This assures that each version of the definitions from the FAIRmat-NeXus proposal remains as closely as possibly semantically aligned with a version published by the NIAC. At the same time this approach ensures that the development speed and update cycles of FAIRmat and the NIAC can be different, and most importantly, do not block each other. Maintaining and minimizing semantic mismatch is key. It is possible that specific application definitions and base classes of the FAIRmat-NeXus proposal may contain additional concepts that have not yet been brought back or standardized by the NIAC. We avoid, though, relaxing requirement constraints for concepts within the FAIRmat definitions compared to the closest matching versions of these concepts in the official definitions. Occasionally, additional optional concepts for specific FAIRmat definitions may extend the official definitions.
```
